Levelling Up: Science, Practice, and Performance

Inspired by a talk by Peter Weng, Search Inside Yourself Leadership Institute


Successful relationships - both inside or outside of business - require a focused effort to meet others where they are to build connections. Without a strong relationship, navigating obstacles and aligning on goals is exponentially more difficult. A key tool for achieving this is mindfulness - the deliberate choice to bring your focus to the present moment and situation, rather than worrying about the future or regretting the past or running on autopilot.


Moving from autopilot to aware: Awareness as a tool for focus and emotional regulation

We all have automatic, instinctual responses to conflict or friction. We've all seen those well-worn repeated conversation where each person is reacting back and forth, tracing the same old repeated steps. Think about the last time you were in a situation like that. What did it feel like? Were you feeling defensive, frustrated, annoyed? Can you believe they said that thing AGAIN? That feeling is your new marker, or key, or trigger to wake up - as soon as you notice it, STOP, take a breath, and observe.

The way to escape is to be deliberate and aware, and choose a response that fits - rather than letting our knee-jerk autopilot make things worse. The briefest moment of deliberate thought is all it takes. Instead of that habitual defense that always puts you both into a tailspin, make a choice. What is actually important right now, in that moment?

Building this skill is not a fast process. The first step is simply to notice. Did you respond that same old way again? Do you feel like you've done this before? Do you notice when your breathing changed and your face warmed? You will find that simply being aware of those moments i ninety percent of the solution. As soon as you are thinking rather than reacting, you suddenly will find yourself in the driver's seat, making choices, instead of being carried along for the ride.

"Between stimulus and response, there is a space. In that space is our power to choose that response. In our response lies our growth and our freedom."


Building resilience: Intention-setting as a tool for maintaining goals over the long term


Successful relationships - both inside or outside of business - require a focused effort to meet others where they are to build connections. Without a strong relationship, navigating obstacles and aligning on goals is exponentially more difficult. A key tool for achieving this is mindfulness - the deliberate choice to bring your focus to the present moment and situation, rather than worrying about the future or regretting the past or running on autopilot.

Imagine yourself in a deep conversation or important meeting you had recently. How do you feel?

Are you worried there isn't enough? Do you feel like your status is threatened? Are you focused primarily on winning? Do you feel defensive? Are you committed to protecting your pet idea? Are you breathing faster? We all instinctually react to protect ourselves when our group or our idea feels like they are "losing", or if they are threatened by a scarcity of resources. However, in that survival fight-or-flight mindset, we sacrifice our connections to others in order to close up and protect.

In that moment, are you curious and committed to growing? Are you ready to make mistakes and learn? Are you imagining the possibilities? Are you playing around with the ideas? Are you bringing others along on the journey? Are you excited? Are you gracefully letting go of your attachment to ideas when they no longer fit? Are you discovering new things? If you have an open, curious, growth mindset, and are focused on the current moment, THAT is when you will make real progress - both in finding solutions for your intentions, and in your connections to others

The key to this is the "Virtue of Lightness" - not wrapping up your ego attached to some ideas in particular, but rather lightly and easily letting ideas go when they no longer fit, no matter how proud you are of them.  "Beware lest you fight a rearguard retreat against the evidence, grudgingly conceding each foot of ground only when forced, feeling cheated. Surrender to the truth as quickly as you can. Do this the instant you realize what you are resisting, the instant you can see from which quarter the winds of evidence are blowing against you." - Eliezer Yudkowsky
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/7ZqGiPHTpiDMwqMN2/twelve-virtues-of-rationality#block2

Be deliberately mindful in your meetings and relationships. As soon as you find yourself feeling defensive, immediately breathe and let go. If you feel that fight-or-flight response from others, immediately stop pushing for a solution and instead focus your full attention on building connections. Without connections, communication is impossible. A defensive, anxious reaction will never change anyone's mind. You have the power to choose how you respond!

You are not your ideas. Your value is intrinsic - unaffected by whether an idea you like was used or not. Be aware of yourself, and those you are connecting with. If you are deeply attached to an idea and feel like your status or standing is affected by that idea's reception or success, you will never be able to connect with the people around you - or find out the even better idea that is waiting for you.












What is a goal or intention you have for yourself? Where do you want to be? What support - from people or practice - will help you get there? What does it feel like when you achieve your goal or intention? Imagine it in your mind like you are watching a movie.





How to keep others in our hearts and minds and work with them in compassion

empathy - the ability to experience and understand what others feel, while maintaining a clear discernment of your oen feelings and perspectives
It is not agreeing, or being 'nice'. It is not having to solve others' problems.

Perspective taking
staying out of judgement
Recognising emotion in others

Trying to make things better as a response is rarely going to help
what makes things better is connection

Perceived fairness
Perceived similarity
Perceived in-group or out-group

Seek similarities
Offer kindness

